# Do we use information correctly when voting?

- The end bias, a cognitive tendency to substitute the end for the whole, plays a significant role in voters' evaluations of presidential performance.

- Retrospective voting involves citizens assessing the past economic performance of incumbents when making electoral decisions.

- The concept of “Attribute Substitution”, illustrated by Kahneman[^1] and Kahneman & Frederick[^2], reveals how individuals unconsciously replace a target attribute with a more readily accessible, related attribute when making judgments.

- This phenomenon, exemplified in experiments by Kahneman, Fredrickson, Schreiber[^3] involving immersion of hands in cold water, showcases people's inclination to remember experiences based on peak and end conditions, termed the "Peak-End Rule." 

- This bias extends to diverse retrospective evaluations ranging from vacations to colonoscopies that underly the tendency to substitute overall assessments with easily accessible peak and end information. The video by [Wireless Philosophy](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RhyJGwNpEcw) does a great job explaining this phenomenae.


## How would you evaluate these economies?
Let's start with a simple test, in your opinion which economy had a better performance?

- Evaluate each economy from 1 to 10

```vegalite
{
  "schema-url": "assets/charts/carterclinton.json"
}
```

Even when presented with data from all years of a President's Term in a simple format, most participants put substantially more weight on the economy in the final year of presidents’ terms.

- To illustrate this behavior, consider the two examples in *Figure 1*. In the left panel, which shows Bill Clinton’s first term, growth was only moderate on average, but ends on a relatively strong note. 

- In the right panel, which shows Jimmy Carter’s only term, growth was stronger in the first two years, but it slows substantially by the election year. 

- Although **cumulative** income growth was the **same** during Carter’s term (5.9% versus 5.9% in Clinton’s), participants rated the economy during Clinton’s first term as much stronger.


## Election's Margin vs RDI Growth and Economy Evaluations
Over a series of experiments, Healy and Lenz[^4] reveal that participants tend to overweight the last year's performance, despite intending to weigh growth equally across all years. Results are shown in *Figure 2* below.

- The graph to the left presents the Vote Margin for each election and the RDI Growth Rate, while the second one the Vote Margin and the Economic Evaluations by participants.

```vegalite
{
  "schema-url": "assets/charts/margingrowtheval.json"
}
```

[^1]: Maps of Bounded Rationality https://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/10.1257/000282803322655392
[^2]: Spontaneous vs Deliberate Thinking https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/identifier/CBO9780511808098A012/type/book_part
[^3]: Cold Water Experiment http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9280.1993.tb00589.x
[^4]: Substituting the End for the Whole https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ajps.12053
